
  dvd_rental Database —  Theory Questions
  by Sakhibjamal Omirbaeva


QUESTION 1. How can one restrict access to certain columns
            of a database table?
----------------------------------------------------------------

There are two main ways to do column-level access control
in PostgreSQL.

The first and most straightforward way is column-level GRANT.
Instead of granting SELECT on the whole table, you can grant
it only on specific columns:

  GRANT SELECT (first_name, last_name, email)
      ON TABLE customer
      TO rentaluser;

This means rentaluser can run:

  SELECT first_name, last_name, email FROM customer;  -- works

But this will fail:

  SELECT * FROM customer;
  -- ERROR: permission denied for table customer
  SELECT customer_id, address_id FROM customer;
  -- ERROR: permission denied for table customer

I found this really useful to know — I didn't realize you could
be that specific with GRANT. It means you can expose just the
columns that a role actually needs.


The second way is to create a VIEW that only exposes certain
columns, and then grant SELECT on the view instead of the table:

  CREATE VIEW customer_public_info AS
      SELECT customer_id, first_name, last_name, email
      FROM customer;

  GRANT SELECT ON customer_public_info TO rentaluser;

The user queries the view and never sees the underlying table
or its hidden columns (like address_id or store_id).

Practical example from dvd_rental:
The staff table contains a password column. You would never
want an application role to be able to read that. So instead
of granting SELECT on the whole staff table, you could do:

  GRANT SELECT (staff_id, first_name, last_name, email, store_id)
      ON TABLE staff
      TO rentaluser;
  -- password column is simply not listed, so it stays hidden

I will write real-world scenarios based on my current job, after completing task1, this topic became more interesting to me, I made more deep dive in production scenarios, looked through corporate documentations and tried to understand how it was all implemented on database with over 23 million registered users. 

Real-world scenario:
This is actually something I deal with at work as a data
analyst, and column-level security comes up
a lot in practice. For example, our credit scoring models work
with customer financial data — income, loan history, repayment
behavior. Not everyone on the team needs to see all of that.
A junior analyst might get SELECT on the feature columns but
not on raw personal identifiers like national ID numbers or
phone numbers. The DBA creates views or uses column grants
so that each role only sees what it actually needs for its job.
The same logic applies here with dvd_rental — just at a much
smaller scale.





QUESTION 2. What is the difference between user identification
            and user authentication?
----------------------------------------------------------------

These two concepts are related but they are not the same thing,
and I think it is easy to confuse them at first.

Identification is the step where the user says who they are.
It is just a claim. For example, when I type:

  psql -U rentaluser -d dvdrental

I am identifying myself as rentaluser. PostgreSQL now knows
who I claim to be.

Authentication is the step where that claim is actually verified.
The system checks: is this person really rentaluser? This is
where a password, a certificate, or some other proof comes in.

A simple way I remember the difference:
  - Identification = "I am rentaluser"
  - Authentication = "Prove it"

In PostgreSQL this maps directly to pg_hba.conf. The "user"
column handles identification (which user is connecting), and
the "auth_method" column handles authentication (how they prove
it):

  # pg_hba.conf
  host  dvdrental  rentaluser  127.0.0.1/32  scram-sha-256
  --                                          ^^^^^^^^^^^^
  --                           authentication method (prove it)

With auth_method = trust there is identification but NO real
authentication — anyone can claim to be any user. That was
actually the big vulnerability I found in Task 1.

Practical example from dvd_rental:
When the dvd_rental app connects as rentaluser, PostgreSQL
first identifies the connecting session (step 1: "this session
says it is rentaluser"), then authenticates it by checking the
password hash against pg_authid (step 2: "ok, the password
matches — identity confirmed").

Real-world scenario:
At the digital bank where I work, this distinction is taken very
seriously. When I connect to our internal databases to run
analytics queries, I first identify myself with my username
(identification), and then I have to pass through two layers
of verification — a password and a one-time code from an
authenticator app (authentication). It's the same concept
as in PostgreSQL, just with an extra factor added on top.
The reason banks are strict about this is that a failed
identification is just a typo, but a failed authentication
means someone tried to access data they shouldn't. Those
two events are logged very differently and trigger different
alerts.




QUESTION 3. What are the recommended authentication protocols
            for PostgreSQL?
----------------------------------------------------------------

PostgreSQL supports several authentication methods and they are
configured per connection type in pg_hba.conf. Here are the
most important ones, from weakest to strongest:

trust
  No authentication at all. Anyone who can connect and claims
  to be a user is accepted. Fine for local development, never
  for production. This is what dvd_rental has by default
  (which is what I flagged in Task 1).

password
  Sends the password in plain text over the network. Insecure
  unless combined with SSL. Should not be used in production.

md5
  Sends an MD5 hash of the password. Better than plain text
  but MD5 is now considered weak because it is vulnerable to
  brute force and rainbow table attacks. Many older PostgreSQL
  setups still use this.

scram-sha-256
  This is the current recommended method. It uses the SCRAM
  protocol with SHA-256, which means:
    - The password is never sent over the network directly
    - It is resistant to replay attacks
    - Even if someone intercepts the exchange, they can't
      recover the password from it
  Available since PostgreSQL 10.

  Example setup in pg_hba.conf:

    host  dvdrental  all  0.0.0.0/0  scram-sha-256

  And create users with passwords:

    CREATE ROLE rentaluser LOGIN PASSWORD 'rentalpassword';

cert
  Uses SSL client certificates instead of passwords. The user
  presents a certificate signed by a trusted CA. Very secure
  but requires more infrastructure to set up.

peer / ident
  For local connections only. PostgreSQL checks the OS username
  of the connecting process. If the OS user is "alice" then
  PostgreSQL accepts a connection as role "alice" without a
  password. Useful for system services on the same machine.

  Example from dvd_rental local setup:

    local  all  postgres  peer
    -- postgres OS user can connect as postgres role without password

ldap / radius / gss / sspi
  Enterprise-level methods that delegate authentication to an
  external system (Active Directory, LDAP server, Kerberos).
  Common in corporate environments.

Recommended for production:
  - scram-sha-256 for password-based auth (current best practice)
  - cert for service-to-service communication
  - peer for trusted local system processes
  - Always combine with SSL (ssl = on in postgresql.conf)

Practical example from dvd_rental:
If I were deploying this for real, I would set:

  # local admin access
  local  dvdrental  postgres     peer
  # app connections over network
  host   dvdrental  rentaluser   0.0.0.0/0  scram-sha-256

Real-world scenario:
At work, we deal with customer financial data
every day, so the authentication standards are much stricter
than what dvd_rental has out of the box. Our PostgreSQL
instances use scram-sha-256 for service account connections,
and all traffic goes over SSL — unencrypted database connections
simply aren't allowed by policy. For internal analyst access
(like me running queries for credit risk or model monitoring),
we also go through an LDAP-based auth layer tied to our
corporate identity system. That way there is one central place
to manage access — if someone leaves the team, their access
is revoked everywhere at once without touching every database
manually. It's a good reminder that these PostgreSQL settings
are not just theory — they directly affect how safely the bank
can operate.



QUESTION 4. What is proxy authentication in PostgreSQL and
            what is it for? Why does it make role-based access
            control easier to implement?
----------------------------------------------------------------

Proxy authentication (also called "user impersonation") is a
pattern in PostgreSQL where one role connects to the database
and then switches to act as another role during the session.
The key command for this is SET ROLE.

How it works:

  -- Connect as the "proxy" user:
  psql -U app_proxy -d dvdrental

  -- Then inside the session, switch to a specific role:
  SET ROLE rentaluser;

  -- Now you have rentaluser's permissions, not app_proxy's
  SELECT * FROM customer;  -- works if rentaluser has SELECT

  -- Switch back when done:
  RESET ROLE;

For this to work, app_proxy needs to be a member of rentaluser:

  GRANT rentaluser TO app_proxy;

There is also a more formal version using SET SESSION
AUTHORIZATION, which goes even deeper and changes the session
user (not just the current role), but SET ROLE is the more
common approach.

Why is this useful for role-based access control?

Without proxy auth, every individual role that needs database
access must have a LOGIN and its own password. If you have
100 customers, you need 100 login roles, 100 passwords, and
100 separate pg_hba.conf entries to manage.

With proxy auth, you have just ONE login role (the proxy user)
that the application connects with. The application then does
SET ROLE client_mary_smith (or whoever the current user is)
after login, and all permissions are applied correctly.

  -- Application connects once as proxy:
  CONNECT as app_proxy WITH PASSWORD '...'

  -- Then per-user logic:
  SET ROLE client_mary_smith;
  SELECT * FROM rental;   -- RLS kicks in, only Mary's rows

  SET ROLE client_patricia_johnson;
  SELECT * FROM rental;   -- now Patricia's rows only

This is much easier to manage because:
  - Only one set of credentials to protect (app_proxy password)
  - pg_hba.conf only needs one entry for the proxy user
  - Adding a new customer role does not require a new login
  - The application handles the role switching logic

Practical example from dvd_rental:
In Task 2 I created client_mary_smith with a LOGIN and password.
That works fine for demonstration purposes, but in a real
system with 599 customers in the dvd_rental database, creating
599 login roles is not realistic. Instead:

  -- One proxy role for the whole application:
  CREATE ROLE dvdrental_proxy LOGIN PASSWORD 'proxypass!';

  -- All customer roles are non-login:
  CREATE ROLE client_mary_smith;       -- no LOGIN
  CREATE ROLE client_patricia_johnson; -- no LOGIN

  -- Proxy can switch to any of them:
  GRANT client_mary_smith       TO dvdrental_proxy;
  GRANT client_patricia_johnson TO dvdrental_proxy;

  -- In the application, after authenticating Mary:
  SET ROLE client_mary_smith;
  -- RLS policies now apply for Mary's customer_id

Real-world scenario:
This pattern is very relevant to what I do in production environments. We
have different teams — credit risk, antifraud, data engineering,
compliance — and each team has different levels of access to
the same underlying tables. Instead of creating a separate
database login for every analyst, we have service accounts
(proxy roles) per team, and individual analyst roles are
granted as members. When I run queries for credit scoring
model work, the connection goes through the risk team's
service account and then switches to my analyst role, which
has access to the feature tables and model monitoring data
but not to raw customer PII or payment transaction details.

It also makes offboarding clean — if someone leaves the team,
you just remove their role from the group. The proxy account
and all other team members are unaffected. That's something
I genuinely appreciate working in a regulated environment,
because access control mistakes in banking are not just
an inconvenience — they can be a compliance issue.
